Okay, so it's time to discuss our first
minimum spanning tree algorithm namely
Prim's algorithm.
Definitely a candidate for the greatest
hits compilation.
And again remember even though it's
called Prim's algorithm, it was actually
discovered earlier by Jarnik.
So how's it work?
Well before showing you any pseudo code,
let's first illustrate it on an example.
As we go through the example, I hope that
the similarities to Dijkstra's shortest
path algorithm will be evident.
I'm going to work with the same example
graph from the previous video with four
vertices and five edges.
The plan is to grow a tree one edge at a
time.
And we're going to keep growing this tree
like a mold.
We're going to start from just a seed
vertex.
And then we're going to suck up one new
vertex with each iteration of the
algorithm.
So, this is similar to Dijkstra's
Algorithm.
In Dijkstra's Algorithm, it was clear
where we should grow the initial mold
from, because we were given a source
vertex, that they're trying to compute
the shortest paths out of.
We have no source vertex in the minimum
spanning tree problem, but it turns out
that we can just pick an arbitrary vertex
to start.
Doesn't matter which one, which is cool.
So the plan is in E generation we're
going to add one edge and span one new
vertex adjacent to the ones we're already
spanning.
Now as a greedy algorithm Prim is simply
going to select the cheapest edge that
allows it to span one additional new
vertex.
Now the start of the algorithm here we're
not really spamming anything.
We are sort of thinking of ourselves as
growing from and currently spanning the
vertex in the upper right.
So what are the edges in which we can
span an adjacent vertex?
Well, there is two inches.
There is the top inch that costs one then
we'll span an addition in the upper left
vertex or the is the edge with cost two
on the right.
If we include that, we'll be able to span
the vertex in the bottom right.
So we're not going to be greedy, we're
just going to choose the cheaper edge,
the edge of cost one.
Now, the vertices that our tree thus far
spans are the top two vertices.
So, in the next iteration, we want to add
one more edge [COUGH] to span one
additional new vertex.
And now we see that there are three edges
sticking out of what we're spanning thus
far that will allow us to span a new
edge.
There's the edges that have cost two,
three, and four.
The two and the three will allow us to
span the vertex in the bottom right.
If we pick the four, that will allow us
to span the vertex in the bottom left.
Yeah, and we're going to be greedy, so of
these three candid edges, we're going to
pick the cheapest one which is the edge
of cost two.
So now the mold that we've been growing
is in effect, covers all of the verticies
except for the one in the bottom left.
So now in the final iteration we want to
include one more edge so that we span
that final remaining vertex.
The one in the bottom left.
Note that there's there was this edge of
cause three that we never added.
But it got sucked up into the tree that
we grew anyways.
So we're going to go ahead and ignore
that.
Adding the three wouldn't allow us to
span any more vertices.
In fact, it would create a loop which we
don't want.
So we're going to say, okay.
We'll have the two edges that would allow
us to span an extra vertex.
There's the four and there's the five.
We're going to be greedy,
we're going to pick the four.
And once we have the edges of the cost
one and two and three and four we have a
spanning tree there's no loops there's a
path from any vertex to any other vertex
along the pink edges, the cost is seven
you might recall from the previous video
this is indeed the minimum cost spanning
tree of this graph.
Of course, the fact that we have this
simple procedure that works correctly in
this toy example, which is four vertices
and five edges, really means nothing.
I mean you shouldn't draw any immediate
conclusions that this is a good algorithm
in general even though that is going to
be the case.
So let's next go and actually define the
algorithm generally.
So if you have a general graph, what does
it mean to start somewhere and grow a
mold, span one more vertex each
iteration, always proceeding greedily
until you are done.
So lets spell out the pseudo code on the
next slide.
So here is Prim's minimum spanning tree
algorithm.
We're going to start with just two lines
of initialization.
We're going to maintain a set of
vertices, capital X.
This is meant to the be the vertices that
we span so far.
Again, we need some seed vertex from
which to start the process.
It doesn't matter where, which one we
pick.
We're going to get the same tree no
matter what, so just call it little s.
That's an arbitrary vertex from which we
start growth.
The other thing we're maintaining is, of
course, the tree.
So that's initially going to be empty.
We're going to add one edge to it in each
iteration.
An invarient that we are going to
maintain throughout the algorithm is that
the edges that currently reside in the
set capital T span the verticies that
currently reside in the set capital X.
Then we're going to have our main while
loop.
this is the workhorse of the algorithm.
And it's very similar to the one in
Dijkstra's algorithm.
Namely, each iteration is responsible for
picking one edge crossing the current
frontier.
advancing to include one new vertex.
And again, it's going to be greed.
The criterion's going to be different, in
fact, simpler, than with Dijkstra's
Algorithm instead of looking at links.
We're just going to say, what's the
cheapest edge that allows us to span a
new vertex?
So the loop's going to keep going, as
long as there are vertices that we don't
yet span.
And then what we do is we search to the
edges that allow us to span a new vertex.
So which edges are those?
Well we want there to be one endpoint in
the set X of vertices we already have our
tree spanning and we want the other end
point to be non-redundant, so we want it
to be outside of X.
So if we have an edge that crosses the
frontier in this sense, one endpoint in
X, in endpoint outside that's how we
increase the number of spanned vertices
by one in an iteration.
So if E is the cheapest edge amongst all
of those that cross the front here with
one end point on either side, that's the
one we're going to add to our tree so far
capital T in this iteration, it's end
point that's not already in capital X,
that's going to be the very text that we
add to X in this iteration.
And again the semantics of an iteration
is that we're trying to increase the
number of spanned vertices while paying
as little as possible, that's the sense
in which a prim's algorithm is a greedy
algorithm.
So as usual with a greedy algorithm, this
seems natural enough, but it's not at all
clear that it's correct, that it always
computes in minimum spanning tree.
In fact, if you think about it's not even
obvious, it actually computes a spannin
tree at all, minimum or otherwise, but it
is correct.
Let's make that statement precise on the
next slide.
So the key claim is that Prim's Algorithm
is correct.
Given any connected input graph, it is
guaranteed to output a spanning tree with
minimum possible cost.
So before we delve into any details, let
me just finish this video by telling you
about the proof plan.
We're going to prove this theorem in two
parts.
First, we're going to establish that it
outputs some spanning tree.
Maybe, maybe not minimum.
Even that's non trivial.
Then we'll worry about arguing that the
spanning tree output actually is one of
minimum cost.
Both parts of the proof are interesting.
For part one to argue that we output some
spanning tree, we're going to review some
preliminaries about graphs and about cuts
and about spanning trees and graphs.
For part two to argue optimality, we're
going to rely on a very neat property of
spanning trees, minimum spanning trees
called the cut property.
I'm happy to report so that the work that
we do here and in both parts will bear
further fruit later we're going to reuse
these ingredients when we prove the
correctness of another MST algorithm
named McCrustgrals algorithm.
For those of you who would much rather
talk about running time than correctness
don't worry your time will come after we
wrap up this correctness proof I'll
address how do you implement prim's
algorithm quickly in particular using
heaps we'll get the running time down to
the near linear bound of O of M log n.